Why Spring Boot?
The Spring framework, including Spring Security,
is very comprehensive with an active community
constantly adding features and enhancements.
Just check out the course Spring: The Big Picture by Dustin Schultz.
It's over an hour long just to explain all the aspects of
the Spring framework at a very high level.
The framework is also very flexible, which has its benefits,
but also it can make it a challenge to configure correctly,
as well as dependency version management of all the Spring packages.
Hence, Spring Boot,
which addresses a lot of this complexity of configuration by
taking an opinionated view of the Spring platform and doing
a lot of the configuration, setup,
heavy lifting for you so you can focus on the important parts.
It's time for a demo.
In this demo, we're going to configure Spring Security using Spring Boot.
The demo application is a crypto currency portfolio site.
It allows you to keep track of your positions for each coin.
You can add, buy, and sell transactions,
view and delete transactions, as well as raise support queries.
There is also a section for administrators.
Securing it with Spring Boot is simple.
All you need to do is add the spring-boot- starter-security dependency.
No version is required as this is handled by the parent poms,
which makes like so much easier.
With so many Spring dependencies,
it used to be a nightmare just to maintain the correct compatible versions.
If all this worked,
then we should see the password printed in the logs the
next time we start our application.
If a UserDetailsService is not configured,
then Spring provides a default one with an in-memory AuthenticationManager,
which creates a default user with a randomly generated password.
If you don't see it printed,
check your info log settings and ensure that it's not disabled.
Let's copy this password as we will be using it to log in to the application.
Now if we try to access the previous URL for the portfolio,
we are now redirected to a default Spring login page,
which does look a little bit bland, but it does the job.
In future modules, we will add a nice, fancy page.
The username is user, and we're going to paste in the password the logs.
We now have access to the site.
Let's try logging in again,
but this time with some breakpoints to see what is happening under the covers.
Before we do that,
let's also inspect the communication between the browser and our application.
If we right-click and select Inspect and then select Network,
we can see all the network traffic.
The authentication request sent from our browser is a post and has the
password end username in the body of the message.
The first breakpoint is on the DelegatingFilterProxy,
which, as you might recall,
is the Spring Security filter registered with the web
container where all requests are forwarded to.
You can see its delegate is the FilterChainProxy that has a
bean named springSecurityFilterChain.
And it also has a single filter chain configured.
The filterChain has a requestMatcher of Any,
meaning that it will handle all the requests.
If you expand the filters,
you can see some of the familiar ones we've talked about previously,
like the SecurityContextPersistenceFilter,
which manages the SecurityContext.
The LogoutFilter.
As the name suggests, it handles the logout requests.
By default, Spring configures a logout entry point.
So if, for example, you make a request to /logout,
that will be handled by the LogoutFilter.
There are two authentication filters,
the UsernamePasswordAuthenticationFilter and the BasicAuthenticationFilter.
Hence, you can use both strategies.
Finally, we have the ExceptionTranslationFilter and the Interceptor.
Let's look at one of the authentication filters,
and, as expected, we have an authenticationManager.
The manager has an authentication provider,
which has an in-memory userDetailsService.
If we allow this request to progress from the DelegatingFilterProxy,
it actually hits the UsernamePasswordAuthenticationFilter
where the username and password is extracted from the
request and used to authenticate.
Now you might be wondering why the BasicAuthenticationFilter wasn't used.
Well if we look at the ExceptionTranslationFilter
at the authenticationEntryPoint,
it is defaulted to the LoginUrlAuthenticationEntryPoint.
So when the first request tried to access the page,
the interceptor threw an AccessDeniedException that was caught by the exceptions
filter that used the LoginUrlAuthenticationEntryPoint to generate a default
login page and redirect the client browser to that.
Since the credentials are passed in the request body,
that is handled by the authentication filter as basic
expects the credentials to be in the header.
In the next section, we'll actually go over basic in more detail,
so that will make more sense.
So how did Spring Boot configure all this?
We mentioned before that it's very opinionated.
How did it make its decisions?
Let's find out.
To make decisions, Spring Boot uses these auto configuration classes,
which are configured in the Spring Boot autoconfigure dependency.
The classes are defined in the spring.factories file located
in the META- INF folder of that dependency.
Spring Boot will load these on startup.
They make all the decisions as to how and what to
configure based on a number of factors, like class path,
configured beans, environment, and settings.
There are a number of key Spring Security autoconfiguration classes,
which are highlighted here.
The first one is the SecurityAutoConfiguration class.
Now the way these auto configuration classes decide on what to configure
and what not to is through these conditional annotations.
ConditionalonClass, for example,
checks the class path for the presence of a particular class,
in this case the DefaultAuthenticationEventPublisher class.
If it is present, then the autoconfiguration is activated.
Recall that as soon as we added the Spring Security startup dependency,
Security just magically appeared.
Well this is how that happened.
The autoconfiguration class detected the presence of the security
class and decided that you wanted security enabled.
Now this auto configuration class registers the
default AuthenticationEventPublisher,
and it uses a ConditionalOnMissingBean annotation,
which means that if you haven't configured your own
AuthenticationEventPublisher, that Spring creates a default one.
But if you do configure one, then Spring will back off.
The class also imports three other configuration classes,
the SpringBootWebSecurityConfiguration,
which configures the DefaultConfigurationAdapter.
Now the adapter is a key component.
You will extend this class if you want to customize the security settings.
If we drill into it,
the default settings are that any request needs authentication,
and the method of authentication is form or Basic.
This is why the FilterChain mapper previously was any,
and both the Username and PasswordAuthenticationFilter and
BasicAuthenticationFilter was set up.
The other autoconfiguration class imported by the Spring
autoconfiguration was the WebSecurityEnablerConfiguration.
The key feature here is the annotation, EnableWebSecurity.
If we did not use Spring Boot,
we would've had to manually create a configuration class with this annotation,
hence another example where Spring Boot takes care of the configuration for us.
The key task this annotation performs is to create the
FilterChainProxy using the settings provided in the
configuration adapter we just looked at previously.
It registers the FilterChainProxy as a bean with a name
of a Spring Security Filter Chain.
Now this is key as the DelegatingFilterChainProxy will expect a
bean of that name to be configured in the context.
In effect,
the security autoconfiguration has now initialized the FilterChainProxy.
All that's left is to configure the DelegatingFilterProxy
and plug that into the servlet container.
Now this done through the autoconfig class, SecurityFilterAutoConfiguration.
Again, after it performs all the conditional checks,
it sets up the DelegatingFilterProxy with the FilterChainProxy as the delegate.
The other autoconfiguration class worth mentioning is the
UserDetailsServiceAutoConfiguration.
It sets up the default InMemory AuthenticationManager and
generates and prints the password we use to login.
Now if by any chance,
you wanted to disable all these autoconfiguration and do it all yourself,
you can simply exclude all these autoconfiguration classes in your
Spring Boot application annotation as shown here.
If you're interested in learning more about Spring Boot's autoconfiguration,
then I would recommend the course, Spring Boot: Efficient Development,
Configuration, and Deployment by Dustin Schultz, which covers this in detail.